                                                                                                     www.nature.com/scientificreports




                OPEN             Experimental results and analysis
                                 of plasma dynamics and radiation
                                 output of the 100 kV dense plasma
                                 focus FAETON-I
                                 Vahid Damideh1,2, J. C. Btaiche1,2, Alex Ho1,2, Isaac Hassen1,2, Sophie Faliero1,
                                 Paria Makaremi-Esfarjani2, T. A. Mehlhorn1,3, Greg Van Dyk1, Elahe Aranfar2, Hao Xian Tan2,
                                 Emile Beaulieu2, Pierre Tochon2, Alexei Akoulov2, Edward Smith2, Eric Contreras1,
                                 John Deneen1, Jay Angel1, George Kimata2, Gabriel Owh1, Jaffer Razavi2 & Sing Lee2
                                 FAETON-I is the highest direct-charged voltage plasma focus (PF), at 100 kV, 1 MA peak current. F-I
                                 produces consistent 2.5 × 1010 D-D neutrons/shot, over 3 MeV X-rays and ∼ 350 keV deuterons,
                                 demonstrating unique combined neutron-gamma environment. Its peak neutron yield was recorded
                                 at 8 × 1010 neutrons/shot at 12 Torr deuterium. The best peak dynamics-induced pinch voltage was
                                 measured at 194 kV. A major difficulty anticipated for PF operation at high-voltage and high-current is
                                 the likelihood of re-strikes which divert current away from the compressing plasma. F-I shows excellent
                                 current sheath dynamics and above-scaling D-D neutron yield, despite severe re-strikes. This study,
                                 correlating current and voltage time profiles with radial trajectories, reveals that the dynamics-induced
                                 voltage peak of ∼ 150 kV, produces deuteron beam first, then the re-strikes, which do not affect the
                                 target pinch plasma in geometry and areal density. Thus, this first neutron pulse is hardly affected by
                                 re-strikes, and the very high-voltage results in above-scaling out-performance, despite degradation of
                                 the second neutron pulse from pinch instabilities. Moreover, upgrading to D-T operation, it is expected
                                 that the first pulse at 100 − 200 keV (peak D-T cross section) ion energy, will completely dominate the
                                 second pulse with micro-beams at MeV (low D-T cross section).

                                 Keywords Z-pinch, Dense plasma focus, Dynamics-induced pinch voltage, Plasma dynamics, Re-strike,
                                 Neutron yield

                                 The dense plasma focus (DPF) is a coaxial plasma railgun that concludes its plasma discharge in a Z-pinch
                                 configuration1–4. The discharge between electrodes is initiated during the “breakdown phase” by either a
                                 flashover across the primary insulator separating the electrodes, within a working gas, or by plasma injected
                                 into the inter-electrode space using fast gas puff valves. During the “axial phase,” the current sheath5,6 formed
                                 in the inter-electrode space ionizes and sweeps up the gas along the z-axis, driven by the azimuthal magnetic
                                 field generated by the current loop7. When the plasma reaches the end of the inner electrode, it accelerates axis-
                                 symmetrically inwards during the “radial phase.” The plasma layer is characterized by a strong shock at the front
                                 driven by a magnetic piston at the back. The piston reaches its highest speed just before the shock front coalesces
                                 onto the axis, leading to the formation of a reflected shock (RS), which initiates the process of stagnation. The
                                 motion of the piston induces a voltage that depends on current, speed, and geometry. For a small focus of 100
                                 kA, this piston induced voltage is typically about 10 kV, whereas for a 1 MA focus, it can exceed 100 kV2,8,9. This
                                 high voltage accelerates deuterons, generating an initial pulse of fast deuteron beams with correspondingly high
                                 energies. For large PFs it is expected that the dynamics-induced voltages may cause re-strikes just before the start
                                 of the stagnation process, resulting in reduced current plasma dynamics2,5,8–10.
                                     The RS moves radially outward toward the radially inward-moving piston. When the RS meets the piston, the
                                 stagnation process completes, and the stagnated plasma undergoes the pinch phase. Instabilities develop during
                                 the pinching process11, disrupting the plasma and interrupting current flow. This leads to significant charge
                                 accumulation and the formation of strong, localized electric fields. Ions entering these high-field regions are


                                 1Fuse Energy Technologies Corp., 2705 Merced St, San Leandro, CA, USA. 2Fuse Energy Technologies Inc.,

                                 Napierville, QC, Canada. 3Department of Nuclear Engineering and Radiological Sciences, University of Michigan,
                                 Ann Arbor, MI, USA. email: vahid@f.energy; singlee@f.energy


Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:23048               | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-07939-x                                                  1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                 accelerated into a multitude of micro beams, which collectively form a second pulse of fast ion beam with higher
                                 energies than the first, up to MeV, primarily directed away from the anode1,2. Thus, the first dynamics-induced
                                 pulse of fast ion beams is produced just before stagnation, while the second pulse is generated toward the end of
                                 the pinch phase, merging from a multitude of instability-produced micro ion beams.
                                      In a deuterium or deuterium-–tritium mix, fusion occurs via beam-target fusion6. With deuterium in small
                                 PFs, the first neutron pulse is typically insignificant relative to the neutron yield of the second pulse. In a large
                                 PF, for example the Poseidon, the first pulse typically contributed one third of the averaged neutron yield and
                                 was constant in quantity. The second pulse was more variable, contributing more in good shots, and less in poor
                                 shots, averaging twice the neutron production of the first pulse2,12.
                                      In some geometries and conditions, thermonuclear fusion may also significantly contribute to the total neutron
                                 yield in DPFs and similar Z-pinch devices8,12–14. In any case, the same high voltages that accelerate the ions also
                                 accelerate the electrons predominantly toward the anode and generate X-ray pulses through bremsstrahlung
                                 emission on impact. Additionally, softer X-rays15 are generated from the plasmas as bremsstrahlung in fully
                                 ionized deuterium; but line emissions dominate if operated in or doped with high-Z gases. Both the neutron and
                                 X-ray pulses are extremely bright and typically occur within less than 100 nanoseconds. These intense and brief
                                 radiation bursts make the DPF an attractive candidate for radiation test facilities.
                                      Such facilities play a critical role in advancing technologies for environments exposed to ionizing radiation,
                                 offering invaluable services for radiation hardening and neutron single event effects (nSEE) testing. Radiation
                                 hardening ensures the reliability and resilience of electronics and materials under harsh conditions16–18. The
                                 nSEE testing, which evaluates the susceptibility of components to transient and permanent radiation-induced
                                 disruptions due to neutrons, is vital for safeguarding systems against neutron single-event upsets/transients,
                                 latch-ups, and burnouts amongst other responses, caused by atmospheric neutrons, particle collisions, or man-
                                 made environments. These test capabilities are indispensable for organizations across diverse sectors, including
                                 national security, aerospace, medical device manufacturing, nuclear energy, and scientific research. They enable
                                 the development of robust technologies, ensuring mission-critical systems operate reliably in high-radiation
                                 environments, ultimately supporting innovation, security, and public safety17–19.
                                      High voltages at the level of 100 kV are needed for good fusion neutron yields in large deuterium plasma
                                 focus devices. Fuse Energy Technologies (Fuse) has designed and built a 100 kV, 125 kJ dense plasma focus
                                 device called “FAETON-I” (F-I) to evaluate the radiation effects testing capabilities of the technology. When F-I
                                 is directly charged to 100 kV, its discharge generates ∼ 1 MA of electrical current with a rise time of ∼ 3.7 µ
                                 s. Extensive experimentation was performed on F-I for over 1100 shots, establishing novel characterization of
                                 DPF outputs. The radiation characteristics of F-I and their correlation with the Lee Model Code are presented
                                 in this paper.
                                      At such high voltages, three critical questions arise, hitherto unanswered. Do current sheaths form properly
                                 with good dynamics? Will re-strikes seriously degrade neutron yields? How does fusion neutron yield correlate
                                 with dynamics-induced voltage peak? A major difficulty anticipated for plasma focus operation at high voltage
                                 and high current is the likelihood of re-strikes which divert current away from the compressing plasma. The high
                                 speeds of the current sheath as the radial shock wave accelerates towards the axis during the radial phase leads to
                                 high induced voltages which are known to exceed 100 kV for MA devices20,21. Re-strikes were indeed observed
                                 to be commonplace in F-I with dynamics-induced voltages often exceeding 150 kV.
                                      In this study, the Lee code is employed to simulate F-I performance, plasma dynamics, and neutron yield.
                                 The Lee code is a computational tool for simulating DPFs. It couples the electrical circuit equations with plasma
                                 dynamics, thermodynamics, and radiation to model the entire operation of a DPF machine. The code divides
                                 the plasma focus process into five phases (axial acceleration, radial compression, pinch, radiative cooling, and
                                 post-pinch expansion), solving normalized equations to maintain energy, charge, and mass consistency while
                                 accounting for radiation losses and plasma self-absorption22–24.
                                      The Lee Code was modified to accommodate these re-strikes, allowing analysis of the measured current and
                                 voltages to be time-correlated to the dynamics. These studies confirm that proper dynamics was achieved and
                                 give the first indication that despite these re-strikes, high voltage and high current plasma focus devices can still
                                                                                                                          10     3.8
                                 outperform the universal scaling rule for neutron production of YD−D = 1.8 × 10 × Ipeak , Ipeak in MA22,
                                 compiled from the community of plasma focus devices. The analysis also reveals why the re-strikes are not as
                                 detrimental as expected and concludes with the expectation that in D-T operation re-strikes may not matter at
                                 all for neutron production. The confirmation that high voltage operation does not preclude good current sheath
                                 formation and proper dynamics and that despite restrikes neutron yields outperform the universal scaling
                                 law gives confidence for up-scaling to larger devices. Moreover, FAETON-I reveals that the outlook for D-T
                                 operation is even better. This is discussed at the conclusion of this paper.

                                 Experimental setup
                                 This section presents a comprehensive overview of the experimental setup, detailing the design and key
                                 operational parameters of the F-I device. It also describes the set of diagnostic tools used to analyze plasma
                                 dynamics and radiation production. These diagnostics provide essential data for understanding the performance
                                 and behavior of F-I under various operating conditions.

                                 FAETON-I design
                                 F-I is a 100 kV, 125 kJ dense plasma focus with two coaxial, concentric electrodes made of oxygen-free copper.
                                 The electrodes are isolated at the launching end by a 6.5 cm long, 10 mm thick MACOR insulator, and separated
                                 by an A-K (anode-cathode) gap of 5 cm. The anode is 17 cm long with a 5 cm radius and has a taper that starts at



Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:23048               | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-07939-x                                                   2
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                 15 cm with a final radius of 1.9 cm. The cathode is made of 24 copper bars, 12 mm in diameter and 25 cm long,
                                 that encircle the anode with a radius of 10.6 cm.
                                     Its stainless-steel vacuum chamber is filled with deuterium or a mixture of deuterium and Krypton at a
                                 pressure range of 10-40 Torr. The capacitor bank consists of five capacitors, each 5 µF with rated voltage of 150
                                 kV, and stores 125 kJ when operated at 100 kV. Each capacitor is triggered by a 120 kV, 750 kA self-mounted rail
                                 gap switch filled with SF6 to 1 atm, designed and fabricated in-house. These rail gap switches are individually
                                 triggered using a five-channel BFMG19, which delivers -150 kV pulses with a 10-90% rise time of ∼ 13 ns to
                                 the knife-edge of each switch. The triggering jitter between the rail gap switches is less than 2 ns, ensuring
                                 synchronized discharge. The energy from the capacitor bank is transferred to F-I through ten transmission lines
                                 made of RG220/U coaxial cables. The static inductance of the system is ∼220 nH. During a discharge it generates
                                 up to ∼1 MA electrical current with the rise time of ∼3.7 µs. The main parameters of F-I were simulated using
                                 Lee model code22. Table 1 presents the design and operational characteristics of F-I DPF system.

                                 Diagnostics
                                 The diagnostic system employed in this study provides a comprehensive evaluation of the DPF, characterizing
                                 the current sheath dynamics and dynamics-induced voltage, neutron yield, radiation dose, anisotropy
                                 characteristics, and ion energy measurements of F-I. The diagnostics include Pearson current probes, Rogowski
                                 coils, voltage probe, bubble detectors, silver activation neutron counters, Lead-shielded PMT scintillators, and
                                 a fast Faraday Cup.
                                     Plasma current diagnostics were performed using a Pearson current probe (model 4418) and Rogowski coils
                                 made in-house, positioned around individual transmission lines to measure the total current (I) and its time
                                 derivative (dI/dt) in F-I. Additionally, a 100 MHz high-voltage probe was positioned at the back of the anode
                                 plate to monitor the dynamics-induced voltage. These measurements, correlated to the Lee code, provide critical
                                 insights into the dynamics of plasma discharge. The data acquisition system used for these diagnostics were two
                                 Tektronix 4 Series Mixed Signal Oscilloscopes MSO46 with a 350 MHz bandwidth and a 6.25 Gs/s sampling rate.
                                     Neutron dose measurements were performed using bubble detectors BTI models with sensitivities of 43
                                 bubbles/mrem (4 bubbles/µSv) and 44 bubbles/mrem (4.1 bubbles/µSv). As shown in Fig. 1, these detectors were
                                 positioned at two locations: one positioned 5 m axial to the pinch in the z-direction and the other positioned 3 m
                                 lateral to the pinch at a 90◦ angle, enabling spatially resolved neutron dose quantification.
                                     In addition, a silver activation neutron counting method was employed in F-I neutron characterization,
                                 consisting of a CapeSym LaBr3 -14x25c-SiPM-T gamma detectors25–27 and thin silver foils (2 cm × 2 cm × 0.3
                                 mm). The gamma detectors were calibrated using known 57 Co and 60 Co sources. During operation, the foils
                                 were placed behind a 7.5 cm thick HDPE moderator to thermalize incident neutrons prior to their interaction
                                 with the foils. The corresponding thermalization efficiency was established numerically using the GEANT428,29
                                 and OpenMC30 software. Neutron-induced radioactive isotopes 108m Ag and 110m Ag were analyzed via gamma
                                 detectors, providing a quantitative measurement of total neutron counts through the characteristic decay of the
                                 activated silver.
                                     Neutron time-of-flight (nToF) measurements were performed using four Lead-Shielded PMT-scintillators31
                                 (Model M540-20x20-6 with EJ-204 scintillator) aligned with lasers and positioned at 5, 10, 20 and 40 m from the
                                 pinch. The nToF system measured the temporal delay between prompt X-rays and neutron-induced signals at
                                 varying distances, enabling the determination of neutron energies based on their velocities.
                                     A fast Faraday Cup (FC)32 was developed in-house and used to evaluate fast ion beam energies in F-I based
                                 on their time-of-flight33–36. The FC was placed 952.8 mm from the source with a 4 mm aperture hole and used a
                                 -136 V bias voltage, as shown in Fig. 1. The response time of this FC is estimated to be about 1 ns.
                                     Together, these diagnostic tools provide precise and complementary data for analyzing the radiation output of
                                 F-I, including its current sheath dynamics and dynamics-induced voltage, neutron yields, radiation anisotropy,
                                 and fast ion beams.



                                  Parameter                    Value
                                  Anode radius                 5 cm
                                  Cathode radius               10.6 cm
                                  Cathode length               25 cm
                                  Effective anode length       17 cm
                                  Insulator sleeve length      6.5 cm
                                  Insulator sleeve thickness   1 cm
                                  System capacitance           25 µF
                                  Capacitor bank energy        125 kJ
                                  Operating voltage            100 kV
                                  Static inductance            ∼220 nH
                                  Operating gas                D2 , D2 + Kr
                                  Operating gas pressure       10–40 Torr
                                  Peak current                 ∼1 MA


                                 Table 1. Design and operational characteristics of F-I.


Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:23048                      | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-07939-x                                         3
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                                 Fig. 1. A sectional sketch of F-I with a schematic of the ion beam emitting in a cone and an ion sample being
                                 measured by the Faraday Cup. The collector plates are illustrated on the left with several coaxial cables from
                                 the capacitor bank. The tapered anode and circle-of-rods cathode are also presented. Positions of two bubble
                                 detectors and a photomultiplier-scintillator are shown.



                                 Simulation
                                 The Lee model code22–24 was used to simulate the outputs of F-I. Based on the characteristics of the design,
                                 including the inductance, capacitance, operating parameters, and anode geometry of F-I, the Lee code was able
                                 to predict the outputs of the device. The Lee code is widely reported to be validated extensively by experimental
                                 data especially in dynamics, energetics, yields of fusion neutrons, soft X-rays, fast ion beams, and fast plasma
                                 streams. Its physical basis, structure and procedures are widely available in many publications. The “clarion call”
                                 of the Lee code over the past four decades is that when the simulated current waveform is identical with the
                                 measured current waveform, then all the gross dynamics and energetics of the device are correctly simulated,
                                 and the yields, for example, neutrons, and plasma X-rays, are correctly predicted.
                                     For F-I studies, the Lee code had to be modified because of the following. In the radial phase, the current
                                 sheath attains the highest speed just before the radial inwards shock front coalesces onto the axis. The induced
                                 voltage reaches a peak and typically exceeds the capacitor charge voltage. For large devices with currents of 1 MA
                                 or more, the likelihood of secondary breakdowns or re-strikes in the inter-electrode space during this moment,
                                 before the start of stagnation, needs to be considered. These re-strikes divert some current from the pinching
                                 plasma. The effect is to reduce the parameter fcr which is the fraction of the circuit current that is flowing into
                                 the plasma during the radial phase. This current factor is typically observed to be fcr = 0.7 for the radial phase.
                                 When re-strikes occur, fcr reduces to a value fcr2 less than 0.7; for example, we may have fcr2 = 0.35( half of
                                 0.7), which is the case with half the plasma current diverted away by the re-strikes. The loss of current reduces
                                 the severity of the pinch, in particular it reduces the plasma temperature.
                                     It was deduced from the current traces that the higher the operating voltage, the more these re-strikes need
                                 to be accounted for. Although the Lee code has been used for simulating plasma focus up to multi-MA and MV,
                                 for comparison with real devices it has not been used much for devices operating beyond several tens of kV.
                                 Typically, the radial phase is reasonably fitted with one set of radial parameters fmr and fcr , fitting the simulated
                                 downward slope of the current dip to an averaged slope observed in the measured data of the current dip. When
                                 the slope is fitted correctly, it is found that the depth of the dip typically concur. However, for F-I current, such
                                 an averaged fitting could not be done satisfactorily, as depicted in Fig. 2a.
                                     For this shot, the slope of the dip was fitted with fcr = 0.9, indicating very good plasma current flow when
                                 compared with the value of 0.7, typically measured in small to medium size plasma focus devices. However, with
                                 this value of fcr , the simulation showed a current dip, starting at just after 4.0 µs, with duration 177 ns before the
                                 dipping ease off into a very shallow angle (see dashed trace in Fig. 2a). Conversely, the measured current dip was
                                 observed to flatten out barely 50 ns after the start of dip, at the point of time when the induced voltage peaked.
                                 Despite all attempts to fit, no averaged current dip slope could be found to match the slope of the measured
                                 current dip whilst at the same time matching the depth of the dip. Figure 2a represents the best attempt to fit. The
                                 discrepancy was far too large to be ignored. The solution was to modify the Lee code to have, in general, several
                                 sets of radial mass and current factors. Specifically, for F-I, two sets fmr and fcr , and fmr2 and fcr2 were found
                                 to be sufficient. For this new version of the Lee code, designated as FF.V5-2, the computation of the radial phase
                                 proceeds with the first set fmr and fcr until the time t = ttransition when the second set fmr2 and fcr2 is applied
                                 for the rest of the computation. In actual usage, the first set is varied to fit the computed slope to the measured
                                 slope for the first part of the dip. The point of time when the measured current slope deviates (by flattening)



Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:23048               | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-07939-x                                                     4
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                                 Fig. 2. (a) Showing the inability of fitting the current dip with one set of radial model parameters. (b) Showing
                                 good fitting of the current dip using a second set of radial model parameters at the transition (re-strike) time.
                                 Note that the transition time correlates to the time of peak voltage.



                                 from the fitted computed slope is noted as the time ttransition . Then the second set fmr2 and fcr2 is introduced
                                 and adjusted until the computed slope also flattens sufficiently to match the measured slope, as shown in Fig. 2b.
                                     The re-strikes likely have little primary effect on the mass factor fmr , the fitting is found to be satisfactorily
                                 done with fmr2 ≤ fmr , varying only fcr2 . The value of fcr2 that fitted the flattening of the measured current
                                 dip was 0.6 for this example. In using the FF.V5-2, we were able to adjust the sets of radial parameters to fit the
                                 current waveform with due consideration being given also to the matching of the voltage waveform.
                                     The data acquired from the Pearson probe, Rogowski coils, and voltage probe was used in combination with
                                 the Lee code to simulate the experimental outputs of the device. For a given shot, the operating parameters of
                                 the device were input into the Lee code control panel. The simulation was run to produce the output current and
                                 voltage waveforms. Those waveforms were compared with the waveforms from F-I’s measured data. Then, the
                                 mass and current factors (model parameters) from the axial and radial phases were adjusted in the control panel,
                                 such that the code’s output waveforms align more with the measured data. This process is repeated, adjusting
                                 the model parameters systematically until the computed current and voltage waveforms fit as well as possible
                                 with the measured waveforms respectively. Then the Lee model code results of plasma dynamics, energetics and
                                 yields are expected to reliably predict the actual experimental values. The computed trajectories of radial inward
                                 shock, reflected shock, and piston (current sheath) were superimposed with the computed and measured current
                                 and voltage waveforms. These simulation results were compared with the measured results for all diagnostics,
                                 including neutron yield, ion energy, and pinch strength to analyze the device. Some results, shown and discussed
                                 in the next section reveal important new ideas about high voltage operation of large plasma focus devices with
                                 encouraging outlook for eventual operation in deuterium-tritium.

                                 Results and discussion
                                 1100 shots were fired on F-I to condition the device, ensure consistency in outputs, and establish optimal
                                 operating parameters. Throughout this conditioning, it was noted that the pressure ranges from 16 Torr
                                 to 12 Torr produced good focusing characteristics and good yield. At that stage insufficient systematic data
                                 was collected for effective statistical analysis although it was observed that within the above stated range, the
                                 diagnostics indicated marginally better performance at the pressures higher than 12 Torr. However, within this
                                 good performance pressure range, it was clear that the measured induced voltages were consistently highest at
                                 12 Torr. Hence, for the study of re-strikes 12 Torr was selected as the operational pressure. 100 shots were fired at
                                 12 Torr to achieve a detailed characterization of the technology. Maximum neutrons were observed axially from
                                 the pinch in the z-direction with a peak measurement of ∼ 8 × 1010 total neutrons.The peak dynamics-induced
                                 voltage measured at 12 Torr D-D was 160.5 kV.
                                    To increase induced voltages, doping with Krypton was attempted. We measured the overall best peak
                                 dynamics-induced voltage of 194 kV when the 12 Torr was doped with 0.1 Torr Krypton (Fig. 5c below shows
                                 an analysis of that shot for comparison with the pure D-D shots). The mean neutron yields for pure D-D and
                                 deuterium-Krypton mixture shots were 3 × 1010 and 4 × 1010 , respectively, for shots with pinch voltages
                                 above 125 kV. However, due to the very high dynamics-induced voltage, further tests with Krypton doping
                                 soon resulted in severe arcing at the back of the device external to the vacuum causing extensive damage to
                                 diagnostics. Therefore, we stopped the doping experiments. All results reported in this paper are for pure D-D
                                 shots except the shot referred to (Shot 895) in Fig. 5c and Table 3.
                                    A typical example comparing the neutron counts from the silver foil activation, bubble detectors, and Lee
                                 code simulations is shown in Table 2. The operating parameters for this shot were 100 kV charging voltage and
                                 12 Torr D-D gas with a peak output voltage of 160.5 kV.



Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:23048               | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-07939-x                                                     5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                  Method                         Neutron Yield
                                  Silver activation              5.5 × 1010
                                  Lateral bubble detector (3m)   5.44 × 1010
                                  Axial bubble detector (5m)     7.92 × 1010
                                  FF.V5-2                        5.28 × 1010

                                 Table 2. Comparison of neutron output between different diagnostic methods and simulation.




                                 Fig. 3. Correlation of measured neutron yield versus peak voltage Vp also designated as Vmax with D-D
                                 beam-target fusion cross section σ(Vmax ) versus Vmax and σ(U ) vs. Vmax , where U = 3Vmax is the effective
                                 inductive voltage used in the Lee code.



                                     As shown in Table 2, the neutron yield for each shot was measured by several methods. The maximum
                                 neutrons were detected axially from the pinch at the front of the device and measured 7.92 × 1010 . Lateral
                                 measurements for this shot were acquired using both silver activation foils and bubble detectors, recording
                                 5.5 × 1010 and 5.44 × 1010 neutrons, respectively. The agreement among the various methods of measurement
                                 was better than 80%. The agreement with the Lee code was typically within a factor of 2. At 100 kV charging
                                 voltage and 12 Torr deuterium, neutron yield data was collected for 85 shots fired over 3 days. For each shot, the
                                 yield was recorded by two bubble detectors placed at 3 m and 5 m, respectively, and a silver activation counter.
                                 The graph, Fig. 3, was plotted on a logarithmic versus linear scale to show a clearly discernible trend, despite the
                                 large scatter of the data points.
                                     The maximum yield was recorded as ∼ 8 × 1010 in the z-direction, and several shots recorded over 5 × 1010
                                 neutrons. Most of the shots were operated with 5 shots to 1 filling of deuterium. The time interval between each
                                 shot was approximately 5 minutes, allowing the electrodes to cool down before performing the next shot. The
                                 pressure was observed to rise noticeably after each shot in the 5-shot series, without apparent detriment to the
                                 neutron yield. Indeed, the first shot in each of the 5-shot series tended to be the lowest in yield, consistent with
                                 our observation, stated earlier, that performance appeared better above 12 Torr. The pressure rise after each shot
                                 is primarily caused by electrode sputtering (where high-energy ions eject metal atoms) and thermal evaporation
                                 of electrode material, compounded by surface erosion from plasma bombardment. A minor contribution comes
                                 from desorption of adsorbed gases from stainless steel walls due to plasma heating and radiation. Figure 3 gave
                                 an average of 2.53 × 1010 for 73 shots at 12 Torr. The peak discharge current Ipeak was measured as 870 kA.
                                 The universal scaling rule compiled for available plasma focus machines is YD−D = 1.8 × 1010 × Ipeak    3.8
                                                                                                                                              , where
                                 Ipeak is in MA22 giving an expected value of 1.1 × 1010 . It is noted that F-I outperforms the universal neutron
                                 scaling law.
                                     Figure 3 shows that the logarithm of yield increases with measured peak voltage Vp . The highest neutron
                                 yield coincides with the highest measured peak voltage of 160.5 kV. A trend line was computed for each of the
                                 two sets of results. The trend lines were compared to the D-D beam-target fusion cross section σ versus deuteron
                                 energy (Vmax in keV) in the same logarithmic linear scale and presented in Fig. 3. Vp in kV is the peak voltage
                                 and Vmax in keV is the corresponding deuteron energy. They have the same value. The values of the σ(Vmax ) and
                                 σ(U ) have been relatively scaled so that the trend comparison with the neutron data could be more easily made.
                                     The analysis indicates that for deuteron energies below 45 keV there is a better correlation between the trend
                                 of D-D neutron yield vs. Vmax with σ(U ) vs. Vmax ( unbroken blue line) rather than with σ(Vmax ) vs. Vmax . This


Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:23048                   | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-07939-x                                              6
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                 validates the use in the Lee code of the effective inductive voltage U = 3Vmax for general plasma focus devices
                                 which generally have induced voltage spikes in the lower tens of kV. However, for deuteron energies in the higher
                                 tens of kV, yield vs. Vmax correlates better with σ(Vmax ) vs. Vmax . This indicates that the Lee code should be
                                 modified accordingly in the case of high voltage, high current focus devices. More importantly, the observation
                                 that neutron yield scales with peak measured voltage could illuminate the neutron production mechanism if we
                                 could determine in a shot whether the voltage peak occurred before or after the start of stagnation of the inward
                                 radial plasma flow. We discuss this with Fig. 4.
                                     Presently, the current dip is acknowledged to be the indicator of focus strength in terms of neutrons and
                                 other radiation. The occurrence of re-strikes in high voltage, high current devices truncates the current dip.
                                 Hence, contrary to typical plasma focus devices, for this class of high voltage large plasma focus devices, the
                                 current dip is not a good indicator. Likewise, the negative spike of dI/dt is not a good indicator. The voltage
                                 spike becomes the neutron indicator. The higher the voltage spike, the higher the deuteron energy and the higher
                                 the beam-target fusion cross section, up to D-D cross section peak of 3 MeV. A proviso is that above 200 keV, the
                                 increase in cross section is less than proportional to any further increase in deuteron energy. Thus, it may not be
                                 efficient to design for induced voltage above some 200 kV. Further, for D-T, the beam-target fusion cross section
                                 peaks at 115 kV and a range of 80–200 kV still gives cross section more than half that at optimum 115 kV. So,
                                 for D-T, a good induced peak voltage to aim for may be 80–200 kV. In this context, we note that for high current
                                 high voltage devices operating in both D-D and D-T, once the dynamics-induced voltages exceed 200 kV, further
                                 increase in neutron yield will have to come from greater number of fast beam ions, greater interaction volume
                                 and higher target density. The Lee code is proven to be effective in the optimization of these parameters as a
                                 device is scaled up for higher energy and higher voltage. In the upgraded FF.V5-2, the code incorporates the
                                 latest features including, importantly, the re-strikes.
                                     An example of a fitting of the current and voltage traces correlated with the computed trajectories of the
                                 radial inward shock front, the reflected shock (stagnation phase) and the piston trajectory up to the end of the
                                 pinch compression phase is shown in Fig. 4. The radial phase portion is expanded and shown in the inset.
                                     For this shot, in order to get a good fit of the simulated current waveform to the measured current waveform,
                                 the radial phase current factor fcr was adjusted at the transition time, determined from the measured current
                                 waveform. The second current factor fcr2 was reduced in steps, from initial value of fcr = 0.8 until at fcr2 = 0.58
                                 a good fit of the flattening of the current dip was obtained. Then the trajectories of the incoming radial shock
                                 wave, the reflected shock RS and the piston trajectories from the simulation were plotted in the inset. The radial
                                 trajectories start at 19 mm, corresponding to the end radius of the tapered anode. It is seen that the transition
                                 time is at 3.745 µs, 105 ns after the start of the radial phase, coinciding with the computed peak of the voltage
                                 spike. Before the re-strike, the total discharge current was 830 kA with 665 kA flowing in the collapsing current
                                 sheath. The evidence is clear that the spiked voltage of 160 kV is causing re-strikes which divert away some
                                 current, leaving only 480 kA in the current sheath. The reduced magnetic drive slows the piston speed from
                                 8.6 cm/µs to 6.1 cm/µs which correspondingly slows the shock speed from 19.3 cm/µs to 12.2 cm/µs. The
                                 slowing of the shock front can be seen in the change in slope of the shock front trace on magnified inspection.
                                 At this transition time, the shock front is 0.8 mm and the piston is 8 mm from the axis, the imploding (and
                                 elongating) slug of plasma is 14 mm long. The radial shock wave hits the axis 10 ns later, forming the reflected
                                 shock RS which starts the stagnation process whereby the plasma motion towards the axis is stopped, the kinetic
                                 energy is converted into thermal energy, and the doubly-shocked stagnated plasma is increased in density and
                                 temperature. This stagnated region expands as the RS moves outwards towards the incoming piston, hitting the




                                 Fig. 4. The fitting of current traces is shown in the main chart together with the voltage waveforms. The inset
                                 shows the correlation of radial phase dynamics with the fitted current dips and voltage spikes. The position of
                                 the shock front and piston at the start of the radial phase at 3.64 µs is 19 mm.


Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:23048               | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-07939-x                                                  7
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                 piston 135 ns later, starting the pinch phase, which lasts 86 ns, with the pinch radius slowly compressing from 4.5
                                 mm to 3.9 mm, with a final length of the pinch of 25 mm, extending both sides of the end of the hollow tapered
                                 end of the anode. The temperature of the plasma has risen from 513,000 K to 840,000 K during the radial shock
                                 acceleration phase, dropped some after the re-strike, increased during the stagnation period reaching 3.1 million
                                 K at the start of pinch, with slight decline to 3.04 million K towards the end of the pinch period. Following
                                 the 160 kV peak, the measured voltage waveform shows 18 MHz oscillations with reducing amplitude, which
                                 appears to be due to ringing of the measurement circuit. There is no sign of any large voltage feature after the
                                 160 kV spike. It would appear that the localized high electric fields of pinch instabilities, well-documented in
                                 many publications, are not measured by our probe. This is likely due to the inadequate frequency response of the
                                 voltage probe. The neutron yield for this shot was measured as 5.5 × 1010 by silver foil activation and bubble
                                 detector, whilst the computed value was 5.4 × 1010 . In the above analysis based on simulation merged with
                                 real time measurements two key points are noted. First, the 160 kV spike occurs before the start of stagnation,
                                 indicating that 160 keV deuteron beams are already produced before the re-strikes. Second, although the re-
                                 strikes reduce the severity of the subsequent compressions, the pinch plasma, which forms the target of the
                                 deuteron beam for fusion reactions is indeed reduced in temperature, but not sufficiently to change its specific
                                 heat ratio or compressibility. Hence, the geometry of the pinch and its areal density exposed to the fast deuteron
                                 beam is unchanged. These two points taken together indicate that the re-strikes do not affect the beam-target
                                 neutron production much, if at all, for this pre-stagnation (first) neutron pulse. The re-strikes are expected to
                                 adversely affect the subsequent instabilities-induced (second) neutron pulse. The total neutron yield which is
                                 measured is therefore reduced due to the re-strikes. Thus, the out-performance of F-I compared to the universal
                                 rule indicates that this superiority is attributed solely to the superiority of the first neutron pulse, to its higher
                                 energy deuterons with the correspondingly higher D-D beam-target fusion cross section.
                                     Furthermore, this study and review has given insight into the effectiveness of the Lee code in the simulation
                                 of neutron yield. Like the voltage probe (which is unable to measure the expected sub-nanosecond voltage pulses
                                 due to the micro-instabilities), the Lee code also does not account for the instabilities phase. For neutron yield,
                                 the code is calibrated against data of compiled machines. One essential feature of the calibration process is to use
                                 a factor of 3 for the induced voltage for the beam ion energy. It is well documented that for a small plasma focus,
                                 the piston induced voltage spike (in the region of 10 kV) does not produce a neutron pulse (first pulse) so that
                                 the neutron yield for the small PF is predominantly from the instability induced deuteron beams (second pulse).
                                 Whereas for a large PF, the first voltage pulse of 50 kV to over 100 kV produces deuterons with high fusion cross
                                 section so that the first neutron pulse is comparable to the second, instability-produced pulse. For small plasma
                                 focus, with induced voltage of about 10 kV, this factor of 3 increases the D-D beam-target fusion cross section
                                 by 200 times, thus gives the small PF a reasonable fusion yield from its piston-induced first neutron pulse which
                                 apparently on average compensates for the non-inclusion of the instability-produced second pulse in the code
                                 calculation. For large plasma focus with piston-induced voltage pulse of say 50-100 kV, increasing the deuteron
                                 energy by a factor of 3, increases D-D fusion yield by about 4 times. Reviewing the nature of the variation of
                                 fusion cross section and the way the plasma focus produces beam-target neutrons with a first pulse due to
                                 piston-induced voltage and a second pulse due to much higher electric fields from micro-instabilities, it appears
                                 that the interplay of these circumstances and the various relevant numbers are fortuitous for the Lee code.
                                 These combined factors allow a calibration process with a multiplier factor of 3 for the piston-induced voltage,
                                 resulting in over-estimation of the first neutron pulse sufficiently to compensate for non-inclusion of the second
                                 instabilities-induced neutron pulse; with a remarkable agreement of computed D-D neutron yield to measured
                                 yield, to within a factor of 2, for most machines, over the range of machines the code has been applied to.
                                     There is another important point to note from this study. For D-T operation, the optimum fusion cross
                                 section is at 115 keV (with factor of 2 from maximum cross section in the optimum fusion range of 80 to 200
                                 keV) contrasting with the way the D-D cross section continues to increase to beyond 1 MeV. For big machines,
                                 the first ion pulse from the piston-induced voltage (of about 100-200 kV) is within the optimum D-T fusion
                                 cross section range, whereas the second pulse with ions from instability fields at higher energies, say 0.6 MeV, has
                                 a fusion cross section reduced by 10 times. This could mean that for big machines operating with D-T, the first
                                 neutron pulse is dominant with a negligible second pulse. Hence re-strikes, which does not affect the neutron
                                 yield much for D-D (reducing only the second re-strike degraded pulse), will not matter at all for big machines
                                 when operating in D-T. Confirmation of this would eliminate the engineering problems involved in re-strike
                                 avoidance.
                                     A further note to show the range of the types of shots occurring in F-I. This code has been applied to the
                                 analysis of all our shots. Three examples are highlighted in the following Fig. 5, one is a low yield shot, another
                                 an average yield shot and the third is a high yield shot. F-I achieved its highest peak dynamics-induced voltage
                                 of 194 kV at a total fill pressure of 12 Torr deuterium-Krypton mixture, with 0.1 Torr of Krypton (comprising
                                 approximately 0.8% of the gas mixture by mass fraction). Figure 5 shows how well the computed current and
                                 voltage waveforms were fitted to the measured waveforms across the whole range of shots, and how these are
                                 then correlated in time to the dynamics of the focusing process. The simulated neutron yield in each of the 3
                                 shots shows reasonable agreement to the measured yield.
                                     Shot 895 displays a large radial current factor of 0.9 with a distinctly larger and sharper current drop which
                                 is a characteristic of doped (with Kr) shots. Both the two high yield shots (shot 897 and shot 1027) started the
                                 radial phase with exceptional current factors significantly larger than the typical 0.7. This seemingly resulted in
                                 good neutron yields greater than 5 × 1010 . Shot 1062 shows good fit without needing a second current factor
                                 (no re-strike), but its current factor starts with such a low value of 0.4, that its dynamics was already degraded,
                                 resulting in a poor value of voltage peak of 40 kV. Table 3 shows the current factors fcr , fcr2 , peak voltage and
                                 the measured and simulated neutron yields.



Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:23048               | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-07939-x                                                    8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                                 Fig. 5. Comparing current, voltage, and dynamics of 3 shots across the range of yields and voltage spikes. (a)
                                 Shot 1062 at 100 kV with D-D mixture at 12 Torr, showing a low yield shot, (b) shot 1036 at 100 kV with D-D
                                 mixture at 12 Torr, showing an average yield shot, and (c) shot 895 at 100 kV with D-D mixture doped with 0.1
                                 Torr Kr, showing highest fcr and highest Vp .



                                  Shot number   fcr    fcr2   Vp ( kV)   Yn ( code)      Yn ( measured)
                                  1062          0.4    0.35   37.3       2.77 × 109      3 × 109
                                  1036          0.72   0.35   101.4      2.54 × 1010     2.21 × 1010
                                                                                    10
                                  1027          0.8    0.58   160.5      5.5 × 10        5.44 × 1010
                                                                                    10
                                  895           0.9    0.7    194        4.1 × 10        6 × 1010

                                 Table 3. Summary of the observed current factors, peak voltage, and neutron yield of a range of shots.



                                     This Table indicates that that a good value of fcr is the primary factor needed for a large value of Vp which
                                 consistently correlates with a good neutron yield Yn . An inspection of all the results confirms that a value of fcr
                                 of 0.7 indicates good current sheath formation leading to proper compression dynamics, an average voltage spike
                                 about 100 kV and neutron yield of about 2.5 × 1010 . Poor shots have fcr substantially lower than 0.7 and shots
                                 with exceptional yields have fcr of 0.8 or better up to 0.9. The severity of re-strikes (indicated by the fraction fcr2
                                 /fcr , the smaller the fraction the more severe is the re-strike) also does not play a role. Re-strikes do not affect
                                 the peak voltage. Re-strikes hardly affect the neutron yield. Moreover, it is firmly established that this voltage
                                 peak occurs pre-stagnation and is therefore dynamics-induced and not related to the later pinch and instabilities.
                                     These results establish that F-I has good current sheath formation and dynamics, producing a substantial
                                 dynamics-induced voltage spike resulting in a good predominantly dynamics-induced neutron yield, that is
                                 hardly affected by re-strikes.
                                     The studies on F-I also include other measurements, some of which are reported briefly here. The neutron
                                 energy was computed from nTOF using PMT-Scintillator at 40 m distance from the pinch column. The PMT-
                                 scintillator, shielded by 30 cm lead blocks, detected gamma photons above 3 MeV at 40 m distance from the
                                 pinch column. Looking at the shape and FWHM of these pulses it is necessary to note that the FC is placed about
                                 1 m from the pinch whilst the neutron detector is placed 40 m away. The dispersive effect on the shape of both
                                 pulses will increase the FWHM as the distance increases. A set of results are presented in Fig. 6a. The inset of


Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:23048                 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-07939-x                                                   9
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                                 Fig. 6. (a) Lead-shielded PM-Scintillator signal at 16 Torr with a time-of-flight of 1794 ns and flight length of
                                 40 m. (b) FC signal at 16 Torr with a time-of-flight of 164.5 ns.



                                 Fig. 6a shows the extraction of neutron energy spectra by an analysis of the neutron pulse shape. The output ion
                                 energy of the Faraday Cup was calculated based on the ToF between the X-ray peak and the ion peak as well as
                                 the distance between the pinch and the FC and the mass of a deuteron. A set of results are presented in Fig. 6b,
                                 showing deuteron energy of ∼ 350 keV.
                                     Based on a comparison of the time of occurrence of the hard X-ray pulse and that of the dynamics-induced
                                 voltage pulse we identify the neutron pulse and the FC fast ion pulse of 350 keV as the ones corresponding to
                                 the dynamics-induced voltage pulse. We have not yet made a systematic study to identify the second pinch-
                                 instability ion pulse and related neutron pulse. Due to re-strikes we expect that in F-I these second pulses are
                                 very small relative to the corresponding first pulses. Moreover, for the FC at about 1 m away the second hard
                                 X-ray pulse would come between the first hard X-ray pulse and the first fast ion pulse, whilst the second fast ion
                                 pulse being 2-3 faster than the first ion pulse would reach the FC not differentiated in time from the first fast
                                 ion pulse. The expected much reduced amplitude of the second fast ion pulse (compared to the first) combined
                                 with the limited time resolution of the FC would make distinguishing the second fast ion pulse very difficult. In
                                 any case, a dedicated systematic study would be needed to work out the redesign of the diagnostic components
                                 needed to uncover the presently buried second pulse.

                                 Conclusion
                                 FAETON-I, the world’s highest direct-charged voltage plasma focus, i.e. 100 kV, was designed as a testbed
                                 for high voltage plasma focus operation. It consistently generates D-D neutron yields of 2.5 × 1010 over five
                                 consecutive shots without gas refilling, maintaining pinch voltages above 150 kV. Over 1100 shots were recorded
                                 in deuterium, producing exceptional yields up to 8 × 1010 D-D neutrons with an anisotropy factor of 1.6,
                                 favoring radiation in the forward on-axis direction. Experimental results, including current sheath dynamics
                                 and dynamics-induced voltage data, align with simulations from the Lee model code, confirming the reliability
                                 of F-I. A maximum dynamics-induced pinch voltage of 194 kV was achieved with a 99.2% deuterium and 0.8%
                                 Krypton mixture at 12 Torr, producing neutron yield of 6 × 1010 . Neutron energy peaked at (2.5 ± 0.3) MeV,
                                 verified by PMT-scintillators located at distances of 5 m, 10 m, 20 m, and 40 m. A fast Faraday cup detected fast
                                 ion beams with ∼ 350 keV energy. PMT-scintillators, shielded by 30 cm lead blocks, detected gamma photons
                                 above 3 MeV at 40 m distance from the pinch column.
                                     The measured voltage spikes are observed to occur before the start of stagnation and correspond with the
                                 simulated piston-induced voltages. These lead to restrikes which typically reduce the current available to drive
                                 the pinch phase. An important observation is that, because of the truncation of the current dip due to restrikes,
                                 the severity of the current dip is not a good indicator for high voltage large plasma focus devices. Instead, the
                                 peak inductive voltage Vmax becomes the preferred indicator. It was observed that the higher this pre-stagnation
                                 voltage peaked, the higher the neutron yield was. The data indicated that an underlying cause is the increasing
                                 D-D fusion cross section with deuteron energy.
                                     The Lee code was modified for two-step radial fitting to cope with the re-strikes. The code shows, in
                                 agreement with measurements, that despite the re-strikes, the neutron yields outperform the universal scaling
                                 rule. It is surmised that the re-strikes do not affect substantially the piston-induced neutron pulse (the first
                                 pulse) that occurs before the start of stagnation, though are expected to reduce the subsequent pinch-instabilities
                                 neutron pulse (the second pulse). Indeed, our code shows a reduction of less than 20% due to the re-strikes.
                                 From the results of F-I, it is further surmised that in future operations in D-T in a scaled up FAETON-X, the first
                                 pulse could dominate, because the piston-induced voltage is at or near the D-T beam-target fusion cross section
                                 peak of 115 kV, whilst the instability-induced voltages are much higher with such degraded cross section that
                                 the second pulse becomes insignificant. Such a situation would be good, as the engineering would not have to
                                 contend with restrike-avoidance techniques.


Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:23048               | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-07939-x                                                10
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                     It is further noted that F-I is more energy efficient than HAWK in neutron production. Generally, neutron
                                 yield is proportional to energy-squared. F-I, with half the operational energy as HAWK, out-performs, delivering
                                 same neutron yield as HAWK, which is noted for its record-breaking efficiency in neutron production, based on
                                 its current20,21,37.
                                     In summary, FAETON-I has demonstrated that in a high voltage, large plasmas focus, current sheaths are
                                 well-formed with good dynamics, and that re-strikes notwithstanding, the D-D neutron yield still outperforms
                                 the universal neutron scaling law. Moreover, scaling up to D-T operations the outlook is even better- the re-
                                 strikes will not matter at all. Incorporating these new features, a D-T, 14.1 MeV neutron yield of 2 × 1014 is
                                 expected for a 65 kV, 1 MJ, 4 MA machine and 2 × 1015 for a 150 kV, 5 MJ, 7 MA plasma focus. These are
                                 planned to be developed as dedicated neutron sources for radiation applications.

                                 Data availability
                                 Data sets generated during the current study are available from the corresponding authors on reasonable request.

                                 Received: 16 April 2025; Accepted: 18 June 2025


                                 References
                                  1. Herold, H. et al. Investigation of the neutron production phase of a large plasma focus device. In IAEA-CN-41/N-6-1, 9th
                                     International Conference on Plasma Physics and Controlled Nuclear Fusion Research. 405–413 (International Atomic Energy
                                     Agency, 1982).
                                  2. Bernard, A. et al. Scientific status of plasma focus research. J. Moscow Phys. 8, 93–170 (1998).
                                  3. Avaria, G. et al. Bayesian inference of spectrometric data and validation with numerical simulations of plasma sheath diagnostics
                                     of a plasma focus discharge. Sci. Rep. 12, 15601 (2022).
                                  4. Sohrabi, M., Zarinshad, A. & Habibi, M. Breakthrough in 4π ion emission mechanism understanding in plasma focus devices. Sci.
                                     Rep. 6, 38843 (2016).
                                  5. Schmidt, A., Tang, V. & Welch, D. Fully kinetic simulations of dense plasma focus Z-pinch devices. Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 205003
                                     (2012).
                                                                                                           16
                                  6. LEE, S. Pushing the limits of existing plasma focus towards 10 fusion neutrons with Q = 0.01. Plasma Sci. Technol. 24,
                                     114005 (2022).
                                  7. Peacock, N. J. & Norton, B. A. Measurement of megagauss magnetic fields in a plasma focus device. Phys. Rev. A 11, 2142 (1975).
                                  8. Schmidt, A. et al. First experiments and radiographs on the MegaJOuLe neutron imaging radiography (MJOLNIR) dense plasma
                                     focus. IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci. 49, 3299–3306 (2021).
                                  9. Schmidt, A. et al. MegaJOuLe neutron imaging radiography (MJOLNIR) dense plasma focus rebuild and high current experiments.
                                     IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci. 52, 4906–4915 (2024).
                                 10. Schmidt, A. et al. Comparisons of dense-plasma-focus kinetic simulations with experimental measurements. Phys. Rev. E 89,
                                     061101 (2014).
                                 11. Kaselouris, E. et al. The influence of the solid to plasma phase transition on the generation of plasma instabilities. Nat. Commun.
                                     8, 1713 (2017).
                                 12. Offermann, D. T. et al. Transition from beam-target to thermonuclear fusion in high-current deuterium Z-pinch simulations. Phys.
                                     Rev. Lett. 116, 195001 (2016).
                                 13. Lee, S. Thermonuclearizing the plasma focus-converting plasma focus fusion mechanism from beam-gas target to thermonuclear.
                                     Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 64, 082001 (2022).
                                 14. Levitt, B. et al. Elevated electron temperature coincident with observed fusion reactions in a sheared-flow-stabilized Z pinch. Phys.
                                     Rev. Lett. 132, 155101 (2024).
                                 15. Lam, R. K. et al. Soft X-ray second harmonic generation as an interfacial probe. Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 023901 (2018).
                                 16. Yogo, A. et al. Laser-driven neutron generation realizing single-shot resonance spectroscopy. Phys. Rev. X 13, 011011 (2023).
                                 17. Aishwarya, K. & Lakshmi, B. TCAD simulation study of heavy ion radiation effects on hetero junctionless tunnel field effect
                                     transistor. Sci. Rep. 14, 7643 (2024).
                                 18. Daneshvar, H. et al. Multilayer radiation shield for satellite electronic components protection. Sci. Rep. 11, 20657 (2021).
                                 19. Damideh, V. et al. Experimental results of a 330 GW impedance-matched marx generator. Sci. Rep. 14, 16889 (2024).
                                 20. Engelbrecht, J. T. et al. Initial conditions in the HAWK dense plasma focus. In 2019 IEEE Pulsed Power & Plasma Science (PPPS).
                                     1–5 (IEEE, 2019).
                                 21. Klir, D. et al. Ion acceleration and neutron production in hybrid gas-puff Z-pinches on the GIT-12 and HAWK generators. Matter
                                     Radiat. Extremes 5 (2020).
                                 22. Lee, S. & Saw, S. H. The Plasma Focus-Numerical Experiments, Insights and Applications 113–232 (Springer Singapore, 2017).
                                 23. Lee, S. Current and neutron scaling for megajoule plasma focus machines. Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 50, 105005 (2008).
                                 24. Lee, S. Plasma focus radiative model: Review of the Lee model code. J. Fusion Energy 33, 319–335 (2014).
                                 25. Ahmadov, F. et al. A gamma-ray spectrometer based on MAPD-3NM-2 and LaBr 3 (Ce) and LSO scintillators for hydrogen
                                     detection on planetary surfaces. Sci. Rep. 15, 2823 (2025).
                                 26. Holik, M. et al. Gamma ray detection performance of newly developed MAPD-3NM-II photosensor with LaBr 3 (Ce) crystal. Sci.
                                     Rep. 12, 15855 (2022).
                                 27. Sahani, R. & Pandya, A. Novel epoxy-bPBD-BisMSB composite plastic scintillator for alpha, beta and gamma radiation detection.
                                     Sci. Rep. 14, 6531 (2024).
                                 28. Agostinelli, S. et al. Geant4-a simulation toolkit. Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. A Accel. Spectrom. Detect. Assoc. Equip.
                                     506, 250–303 (2003).
                                 29. Allison, J. et al. Recent developments in Geant4. Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. A Accel. Spectrom. Detect. Assoc. Equip.
                                     835, 186–225 (2016).
                                 30. Romano, P. K. et al. OpenMC: A state-of-the-art Monte Carlo code for research and development. Ann. Nucl. Energy 82, 90–97
                                     (2015).
                                 31. Quang, N. D. et al. Proton response and neutron spectrum unfolding by solution-grown trans-stilbene scintillator. Sci. Rep. 15,
                                     3506 (2025).
                                 32. Kania, D. R. & Jones, L. A. Observation of an electron beam in an annular gas-puff Z-pinch plasma device. Phys. Rev. Lett. 53, 166
                                     (1984).
                                 33. Diab, F. Ion-beam investigation in a 1.5-kJ dense plasma focus device. Plasma Phys. Rep. 45, 952–964 (2019).
                                 34. Mohanty, S. R., Bhuyan, H., Neog, N. K., Rout, R. K. & Hotta, E. Development of multi faraday cup assembly for ion beam
                                     measurements from a low energy plasma focus device. Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 44, 5199 (2005).



Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:23048                   | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-07939-x                                                                 11
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                 35. Damideh, V. et al. Fast Faraday cup for fast ion beam TOF measurements in deuterium filled plasma focus device and correlation
                                     with Lee model. Phys. Plasmas 24 (2017).
                                 36. Damideh, V. et al. Characteristics of fast ion beam in neon and argon filled plasma focus correlated with Lee model code. Vacuum
                                     169, 108916 (2019).
                                 37. Jackson, S. L. et al. Effect of initial conditions on charged particle acceleration in a dense plasma focus. In 2020 IEEE International
                                     Conference on Plasma Science (ICOPS). 376–376 (IEEE, 2020).

                                 Acknowledgements
                                 The authors would like to sincerely thank Professor David A. Hammer from the School of Electrical and Com-
                                 puter Engineering, Cornell University, for his invaluable suggestions and comments to improve the manuscript.
                                 The authors would like to express their gratitude to the Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission (CNSC) for their
                                 visit, inspection, and valuable guidance in radiation safety, which contributed to enhancing our safety protocols
                                 and compliance measures. We also extend our appreciation to Bubble Technology Industries (BTI) for providing
                                 highly sensitive and high-energy-calibrated bubble detectors, which played a crucial role in our radiation detec-
                                 tion and measurement efforts. Additionally, we thank Fifth Gait Technologies Inc. for their expertise in perform-
                                 ing dosimetry, as well as neutron and X-ray measurements at the Fuse facility, ensuring accurate assessment and
                                 monitoring of radiation environment.

                                 Author contributions
                                 Supervision, writing, review and editing, V.D.; resources, writing, review and editing, J.C.B.; validation, review
                                 and editing, A.H.; writing, original draft preparation, data analysis, simulation, I.H., S.F., P.M.E; review and ed-
                                 iting, validation, T.A.M., G.V.D.; technical support, data acquisition, E.A., H.X.T.; technical support, E.B., P.T.,
                                 A.A., E.S., E.C., J.D., J.A., G.K.; simulation, G.O.; technical support, J.R.; conceptualization, supervision, writing,
                                 review and editing, validation, S.L. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

                                 Declarations

                                 Competing interests
                                 The authors declare no competing interests.

                                 Additional information
                                 Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to V.D. or S.L.
                                 Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
                                 Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
                                 institutional affiliations.
                                 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives
                                 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in
                                 any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide
                                 a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have
                                 permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or
                                 other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
                                 otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence
                                 and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to
                                 obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit ​h​t​t​p​:​/​/​c​r​e​a​t​i​v​e​c​o​m​m​o​
                                 n​s​.​o​r​g​/​l​i​c​e​n​s​e​s​/​b​y​-​n​c​-​n​d​/​4​.​0​/​​​​.​​

                                 © The Author(s) 2025




Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:23048                   | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-07939-x                                                                   12
